Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
three of our three-part mini-series on
the subject of citizenship and identity.
In case you missed it, in part
one, we talked about who can and
can’t become an Italian citizen.
In part two, we talked about the Windrush
Scandal, where tens of thousands of
people in Britain, who had lived in the
country for decades and believed they were
British, were suddenly told they were not.
And in this episode, we are going to
talk about the small Mediterranean
island of Malta, and its battle with
the European Union over its right
to continue selling its passports.
If you are a seriously dedicated listener
to this show, you might remember us
touching on this subject in episode
number 42, back in 2020, but today we
are going to go a lot deeper and talk
about how things have evolved since then.
So let’s not waste a minute,
and get right into it.
So far in this mini-series, we’ve
explored some of the ways in which an
individual becomes a citizen of a country.
They can be born there, they can
have parents or grandparents who are
citizens of that country, they can
marry someone from that country, they
can live in and contribute to that
country for a certain time, after which
they can apply to become a citizen.
For the vast majority of the world’s
population, one or more of these will
be the routes through which they have
acquired citizenship or citizenships.
But there are also countries that
offer a shortcut, countries that
offer their passports to people who
don’t want to wait, people who want
a citizenship now, and are prepared
to pay handsomely for the privilege.
These are the countries that sell
their passports, or to give them their
technical name, countries that offer
“citizenship by investment” schemes.
Typically, these are small
countries, often islands, which
will offer citizenship in exchange
for a cash donation or some kind
of investment in the country.
The first country to start offering
it was the Caribbean island nation
of Saint Kitts and Nevis, which
launched its scheme in 1984.
It offered citizenship of Saint Kitts
and Nevis, along with low tax rates,
in exchange for a cash payment.
You didn’t even have to set foot
in the country, but, for a fee, of
course, you could become a citizen.
And if you’re wondering who was and
is buying these passports, and for
what reason, it’s typically wealthy
individuals looking for three main things.
Firstly, greater travel freedom.
A passport from Saint Kitts and Nevis
gives visa-free access to over 150
countries, including the UK and much
of Europe, which is a big deal for
someone from, say, China or Russia,
where they might need visas, or they
might not be allowed to enter at all.
Second, tax advantages.
Saint Kitts has no income or
capital gains tax for citizens, so
it can be a legal way for the very
rich to reduce their tax bills.
Third, a safety net.
For people from unstable countries,
places with shaky economies, or simply
countries where the government can come
along one day and seize all your assets,
a second passport is like an insurance
policy, a quick exit if things go south.
And for the country that sold
these passports, the benefit
was clear: cold, hard cash.
It costs practically nothing to print a
passport and add a name to a database,
and if there is no residency requirement,
no need for the individual to come there
or buy property, the effect on the local
population is minimal: no complaints
about foreigners increasing property
prices or changing the local environment.
And the fees paid by these foreigners,
or I should say newly minted fellow
citizens, these can be used for everything
from schools to hospitals to pensions.
Given this, after the first scheme
in Saint Kitts and Nevis was launched
in 1984, many other countries
followed suit, offering their own
citizenship by investment schemes.
Soon enough, a wealthy person could choose
from a suite of different countries, like
wandering down a supermarket aisle and
looking at the various offers on sale.
And fast forward to 2014, the
tiny Mediterranean island of Malta
made a splash by launching its own
scheme that didn’t just get you any
passport, it got you a passport to
a country in the European Union.
Now, importantly, Malta wasn’t the
first EU country to launch a CBI-type
scheme; Ireland launched a similar
scheme in 1988, but it was a little
different, and it wasn’t a great success.
Malta’s was different.
Firstly, it was a question of timing.
There were simply a lot more people
who could afford and who wanted to buy
passports in 2014 than there were in 1988.
Whether we are talking about China
or Saudi Arabia or India, or even
Russia, the market for people who
could spend six-figure sums on
citizenship was considerably larger
when Malta launched its scheme.
What’s more, the EU element was more
valuable in 2014 than in the 1990s.
When Ireland launched its programme,
there were only 12 countries in the
EU; when Malta did, there were 28.
And importantly, having a passport
to an EU country means that you have
visa-free travel to any other country
in the EU, which is a large bonus
for a wealthy individual who likes
the idea of trotting between Milan
and Paris and perhaps the odd weekend
trip to Stockholm or Barcelona.
You also have the right to live
in any EU country, so by getting
a Maltese passport, you can live
somewhere more desirable, like the
south of France or a Tuscan villa.
And secondly, the Malta scheme had
some very slick marketing behind it.
A company called Henley and Partners
went around the globe selling passports
on behalf of Malta, and collecting
a healthy commission in the process.
A 4% commission, by the way, on the
cost of a minimum of €700,000, which
would typically rise to almost a
million Euros by the time everything
else was taken into account.
Now, you might be thinking “who would
pay a million Euros for a passport?”,
but the answer is “a lot of people”.
The scheme was officially capped at
1,800 main applicants, which is the
classic marketing ploy of creating
scarcity to encourage people to
take action, and in 10 years, almost
all of those places were sold.
Including dependents–so partners
and children–a total of 5,300 people
were granted Maltese citizenship,
which brought in an estimated
€1.6 billion to the country.
That might not be all that much for a
larger country, but for a small country
like Malta, with a population of less than
half a million, it equated to more than
€3,000 for every man, woman and child.
Yes, not all of this money reached
the average person in Malta, and
there are widespread allegations
of corruption and cronyism, with
politicians and businesspeople siphoning
off large chunks for themselves.
But it did mean that the government
was able to start offering things like
free childcare and make improvements to
the healthcare and education systems.
Now, the scheme in Malta was
slightly stricter than that of
Saint Kitts and Nevis, for example.
There was a theoretical requirement
for you to “live” in Malta, but in
practice this meant you either had
a buy an apartment worth at least
€350,000 or rent one for €1,300 a month.
If you are already paying almost a
million Euros for a passport, another
€1,300 is pocket change, and what this
meant was that there were and still are
hundreds of apartments in Malta that
were rented out purely for the purpose
of meeting this “residency requirement”.
I lived in Malta for 7 years, for
reasons entirely unrelated to passports
or citizenship, I should add, and my
former landlord had two apartments
that he rented out to foreigners.
One was to us.
We were pretty good tenants, I
think, but there was the occasional
problem: the dishwasher broke
or something needed to be fixed.
You know, normal stuff that
happens in any rented apartment.
But he preferred his other tenants,
who rented the apartment opposite us.
They were far less demanding because they
didn’t actually live in the apartment.
They had never even seen it; the
place was completely empty, but
they paid their rent every month,
so they had the paperwork to “prove”
their so-called residency in Malta.
Now, you might think this is all
perfectly fair, and that a country
has the right to decide who it gives
citizenship to, and under what conditions.
You might think that it’s awful, and
that citizenship should be about more
than bank transfers and signatures
in air-conditioned conference rooms.
Someone, or rather something,
that firmly took the latter
position, was the European Union
The EU’s objection wasn’t immediate,
and Malta wasn’t trying to hide
this scheme, quite the opposite.
But as Malta’s programme gathered
pace after its 2014 launch, concerns
started to grow in Brussels.
From the EU’s perspective, the
problem was simple: while every
member state has the sovereign right
to decide who gets its citizenship,
EU citizenship is automatically
attached to national citizenship.
The moment someone becomes Maltese,
they also become European, with
the right to live, work, and travel
freely across 27 other countries.
So, when Malta was selling its
passports, it wasn’t just selling
access to Malta, it was selling
access to the entire European Union.
At first, the European Commission
expressed what you might call gentle
unease about the scheme, with the
occasional politician making a
passing comment about it or mentioning
how it should be looked into.
But as the number of applicants grew,
and as questions were raised about
how thoroughly applicants were being
vetted, the concerns became more serious.
In 2017, a particularly strong light was
shone on Malta after the assassination
of the investigative journalist Daphne
Caruana Galizia, who was, among other
things, looking into allegations of
political corruption specifically
related to sales of passports.
In 2018, the European Parliament
passed a resolution calling on
member states to phase out both
citizenship and residence-by-investment
programmes, warning that they posed
risks related to money laundering,
tax evasion, and security.
The pressure kept mounting, and in October
of 2020, the European Commission formally
launched infringement proceedings against
Malta, accusing it of violating EU law.
At this point, Brussels wasn’t
just politely expressing its
disapproval; it was starting legal
action against a member state.
Malta, for its part, pushed back.
It argued that deciding who becomes
a citizen is a matter of national
sovereignty, something that EU treaties
leave entirely up to member states.
But behind the scenes, the government
also began to make changes.
In late 2020, Malta officially closed
its original Individual Investor
Programme and introduced a new
version, the Maltese Exceptional
Investor Naturalisation Programme.
On paper, this new scheme was stricter.
Applicants now needed to establish
residency for either 12 or 36 months,
depending on the size of their payment,
and the government claimed to have
strengthened its due diligence processes.
But critics, including the European
Commission, argued that these
changes were largely cosmetic.
After all, wealthy individuals could
still buy their way to Maltese citizenship
in just over a year, often without
any genuine connection to the country.
They were still selling passports, it
was now just a little harder to buy them.
And there were more leaks.
In 2021, an investigation called
the Passport Papers revealed that
applicants to the Malta passport
scheme said they only planned to
spend an average of 16 days in the
country, and that this was considered
sufficient by the Maltese government
to qualify for “12 months residency”.
Clearly, the Maltese authorities had
been well-advised when creating the
scheme to add this “12-month residency
requirement”, so as to be able to claim
to the EU that these people were genuine
residents, but these leaked emails showed
that people didn’t really have to spend
any significant time in the country,
they just had to pretend they did.
And so, pressure continued to build,
and the legal battle continued.
In 2022, the European Commission escalated
the case by issuing what’s called a
reasoned opinion, which is the next formal
step in infringement proceedings, and
warned Malta that if it didn’t shut the
programme down entirely, the case would be
referred to the European Court of Justice.
And in mid-2023, that’s exactly what
happened: the dispute landed at the
EU’s highest court, and in April of
2025, the court gave its decision.
The scheme is in violation of EU law,
and–to quote directly–it "amounts to
rendering the acquisition of nationality
a mere commercial transaction".
In other words, something that should
be about true connection–whether
that’s through blood, living in a
country for an extended period, or
through marriage–this is reduced to
just another product with a price tag.
So, what comes next?
Well, as of the time of recording
this episode, not much has changed.
The Henley & Partners website currently
reads, “The Malta Citizenship by
Naturalisation for Exceptional Services
by Direct Investment process is no
longer accepting new applications”, but
there has been no official announcement.
Malta has said it’ll examine the
findings, and most likely it will find
a way to challenge the EU’s decision.
The country may be forced to shut
its programme down permanently, and
this decision could also effectively
block any other EU country from
launching a similar scheme in future.
And that, ultimately, gets to the
heart of the entire controversy.
Is citizenship something that
countries should be able to sell?
Is it simply another product in a global
market, like real estate or stocks?
Or, as the European Union argues,
is it something much deeper, tied
to rights, responsibilities, and the
shared values of a political union?
Malta’s case may seem small and
insignificant–a tiny island selling
a few thousand passports–but the
questions it raises are ones that
every country, and every union of
countries, are being forced to confront.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Malta’s battle with the
EU to sell passports, and with that
comes an end to this mini-series on
the theme of citizenship and identity.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode
and of this mini-series in general.
Do you think an EU country should
have full control over who it
grants passports to, and how?
If you have become a citizen of another
country, do you truly feel like you belong
in that country, and what is your story?
I would love to know, and I’ll be
happy to share my own experience too.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.